<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title no-fragment"  -->

# Carousel Sliders

Get Attention with Carousel Sidebars

> >

Humans are demonstrably attracted to motion, which bootstrap 5 carousels deliver well, but we can use them more than just for the big hero sections of our site. They work really well in sidebars to display a lot of content. It's time to Apply.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Introduction

> >

The typical bootstrap carousel cycles through a series of images and is almost always used at the top of a page with big hero images. But if you take a look at my site, you can see that I'm also using them to call attention to some content on the sidebar.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Carousel Review

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Key Properties

- ID
- `slide`, `carousel-fade`
- `data-bs-ride`
- Indicators

> >

You can insert as many carousels as you want using Bootstrap 5 as long as you include an individual id for each one. Although they will work without the ID most of the time, some of the interface elements like controls and indicators will get confused.

If you add a `slide` class, then the carousel will slide from one slide to another. If you want to fade one slide to the other, you can add a `carousel-fade` class in addition to the `slide` class..

There is a critical data class called `data-bs-ride` that activates that animation. Without this, JavaScript won't know that it needs to control this carousel.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Carousel Images

- `carousel-inner`
  - `carousel-item`
  - `active`

> >

All of the images go in a `carousel-inner` container

Inside their own `carouse-item` container.

The first image gets an extra class called `active`. That lets you control which image is showing when the carousel shows up.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Captions

- `carousel-caption`
  - `carousel-item`
  - `active`

> >

This part is going to be important for us. The captions go in a container called `carousel-caption` with a `d-block` class.

I want these carousels to link to other sites, so I'm adding a link to a headline. It's actually an anchor tag with a class of h5, which makes it look like a level 5 headline.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Controls

- ID
- `data-bs-target`
- `data-bs-slide="prev"`
- `data-bs-slide="next"`

> >

Finally, we have the controls, which are the buttons to move back and forth through the items.

They have to have the proper ID

The left arrow has the `data-bs-slide` attribute with a `prev` value

The right arrow has the `data-bs-slide` attribute with a `next` value

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Aligning the Carousel

```css
#carouselSidebar {
  display: inline-block;
  float: right;
  width: 400px;
}
```

> >

I have a slightly different version of this carousel where I've added some text to the layout so we can see how we'd fit this on the side. To do that we're going to float our Carousel to the right of that text.

You could use columns to position the sidebar, but this way it will move with the content in the article.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Equalizing Proportions

```css
#carouselSidebar .carousel-item img {
  object-fit: cover;
  object-position: center;
  overflow: hidden;
  height: 210px;
}
```

<div class="slide-link"><a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/object-fit"><i class="fab fa-link"></i> Object Fit: //go.raybo.org/3YLC</a></div>

> >

You might notice that the images aren't the same proportions and therefore heights...so I'm going to use a trick that I covered in the previous episode of this series.

Using [object-fit](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/object-fit) and [object-position](object-position) with the `overflow:hidden` property makes the images center with the same proportions. I can also set the height of the image to whatever I need.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Fixing the Overlay Text

> >

That's useful, but as you can see the sidebar's text is being displayed on top of the image. That's not good for our sidebar, but all we have to do is remove the `caption-caption` from the caption container.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Arrows and Indicators

```css
#carouselSidebar .carousel-control-prev,
#carouselSidebar .carousel-control-next {
  align-items: flex-start;
  top: 80px;
}

#carouselSidebar .carousel-indicators {
  align-items: flex-start;
  top: 180px;
}
```

> >

The arrows indicators you can use to go to the previous and next image appear to be gone. They're still there, but since they're centered, they happen to be in the area with the text.

To fix these, we need to position them manually based on the size of our image.

This will place the image and the arrows in the proper place. You need to calculate these manually and make sure that you adjust the height and margin; otherwise they will run on top of the text, but it's not a big deal.

---

<!-- .slide: data-state="layout-title" class="bg-chroma_green"-->

# Stretched Links

```[3]
<a
  href="https://raybo.org"
  class="h5 d-block mt-2
  text-decoration-none text-secondary
    stretched-link
  ">Slide 01</a
>
```

> >

One of the newer features in Bootstrap is the ability to take a link in a component and stretch it so that it cover it's container. You can take advantage of that feature in our carousel and that way you don't have to make a link for both the image and the headline.

All you have to do is add a `stretched-link` class to the link and it will travel up to a container that has a `position: relative` property. This is working well with our carousel, but remember that sometimes you have to add that manually.

If you don't add the `text-decoration-none`, because it's a link it will have an underline and the `text-secondary` class gives it a gray tint instead of the loud blue color.
